HMAS Melbourne (R21) was a Majestic-class light aircraft carrier operated by the Royal Australian Navy (RAN) from 1955 until 1982, and was the third and final conventional aircraft carrier to serve in the RAN.  Melbourne was the only Commonwealth naval vessel to sink two friendly warships in peacetime collisions.
Melbourne was laid down for the Royal Navy as the lead ship of the Majestic class in April 1943, and was launched as HMS Majestic (R77) in February 1945.  At the end of the Second World War, work on the ship was suspended until she was purchased by the RAN in 1947.  At the time of purchase, it was decided to incorporate new aircraft carrier technologies into the design, making Melbourne the third  ship to be constructed with an angled flight deck.  Delays in construction and integrating the enhancements meant that the carrier was not commissioned until 1955.
Melbourne never fired a shot in anger during her service career, having only peripheral, non-combat roles in relation to the Indonesia-Malaysia confrontation and the Vietnam War.  She was, however, involved in two major collisions with allied vessels; though Melbourne was not found to be the primary cause of either incident.  The first collision occurred on the evening of 10 February 1964, in which Melbourne rammed and sank the RAN destroyer HMAS Voyager, when the latter altered course across her bow.  82 of Voyager's personnel were killed, and two Royal Commissions were held to investigate the incident.  The second collision occurred in the early morning of 3 June 1969, when Melbourne also rammed the United States Navy (USN) destroyer USS Frank E. Evans in similar circumstances.  74 American personnel died, and a joint USN–RAN Board of Inquiry was held.  These incidents, along with several minor collisions, shipboard accidents and aircraft losses, led to the belief that Melbourne was jinxed.
Melbourne was paid off from RAN service in 1982.  A proposal to convert her for use as a floating casino failed, and a 1984 sale was cancelled, before she was sold for scrap in 1985 and towed to China for breaking.  The scrapping was delayed so Melbourne could be studied by the People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) as part of a secret project to develop a Chinese aircraft carrier and used to train PLAN aviators in carrier flight operations.

